In your efforts to build the department, did you or
any of your colleagues go to any meetings to
recruit students? Let me see. Let me tell you how I
handled it. You know, at one time, A&M says, you're
going to teach this class at 8 o'clock and 10
o'clock and so forth. And they told me, what are you
going to teach and when are you going to teach?
Well, I knew that was wrong philosophy. So I said, I
want you to give me your Three requests of what you
want to teach and what time you want to teach it, and
I'll work it out for you. I've got me a great big week
map and filled in all of these. And it developed.
There were people who liked 8 o'clock, people who
liked 10 o'clock. You didn't have to say, you're
going to do this. When they gave me that back, I
could fill in the blanks. And I got there,
everybody told me what they wanted. Got what they
wanted at the time, and no hassle. And I'm having
trouble in life. If you treat people that way, you
don't But I wasn't about to sit there and say, look,
you're going to teach them this this time, this
this time. Well, a lot of people don't like 8
o'clock. They like 10 o'clock. And a lot of people
who don't like 10 o'clock will take 8 o'clock. It
works out. You just have to treat people the way you
would like to be treated and be fair to everybody.
And that was the philosophy I used. And I remember
when we went over a 50% girl, so they really went
into action. How many years did that take? Do you
remember? Seven. Seven. So from 68 to... From 70.
No. I didn't have anything to do with the teaching.
They only let me have a key until 69. 69. I got a key.
In January of 70, they gave me all of it. Okay. And I
had to rebuild from that 70. 70.
That's right, 70. And in seven years, we had the 540
kids, a new building, and the $2 million endowed
chair from Ben's family. And that's about as fast
as you can build. But anyway, I enjoyed that. As I
said, the greatest experience of my life was
rebuilding Horticulture to a viable building, a
viable department. And I had to write the history
of the department because I had known or what it was
as students. And I knew we had good professors back
there. Mr. Bryson was a top professor. Dr. Adrian
was a top professor. And I had both of them. You take
the good and leave the rest as you go along. And of
course, with what they had and your philosophy all
mixed together, you come up with a viable mix. And
that was what we did in horticulture. When you
first became responsible for the department,
describe the facilities and the office space that
the department had when you started. OK, we had a
small office for myself and a small office next
door. And we had
two other offices. And we had some offices that
were occupied
forestry and where were those they were they had
they were in in rooms that we needed but what
building uh old horticulture building uh plant
science building no plant science building
because for me we just had a meager space we had one
hall one off and down the hall for um floriculture
and then we had the two There's three offices in the
rest of the suite. But Forestry had some sites that
they had a day and just assumed those rooms. And
they were really in our room, but we couldn't get
them back. Luckily, I was on the Master Plan
Committee, and Perry Atkinson was on that. And he
supported me. What we needed was a horticulture
building, something where we could grow. But we
had no space to grow whatever. And he supported me.
And together, he got an extra $5 million grant
through Dr. Kunkel to build a horticulture. When
Perry Atkinson told Kunkel that we desperately
needed space, that opened the door. And we did get
the building. But I knew we had $13 million for the
building. And our parents told us, that's not
enough. So he was on the big committee. And
together, we got an extra $5 million. And we got
that $18 million. And I never will forget that one
of the people, well, I'll tell you. Let me think of
his name. He just died recently. He was the rose man
from Tyler. And DeWorth brought him down and then
wanted to fire him. And
Bloodworth wouldn't let him fire him. So I
inherited him. And he said it was like a breath of
fresh air coming in. Because I wouldn't take
anything off of DeWorth. See, DeWorth had
destroyed landscape architecture completely in
the years. Well, Mr. Hensel had hired Bob White,
and he was building landscape architecture. But
after Mr. Hensel died, DeWorth would give Bob
White no help, no support, whatever. And finally,
he moved to Houston and opened a practice.
Then DeWorth, well, I came along. And I wouldn't
take a leap off of DeWorth, because I knew not to.
But we finally got Bob White back. But you see, Bob
White then went from the College of Agriculture to
the College of Engineering, where landscape
architecture belonged. And then it became, thus,
the College of Environmental
Design. And he was there and went to Harvard there.
And Robert White has done a masterful job. I call
him the Renaissance man in landscape
architecture. And he was really a good man, but
DeWorth just sacrificed him for what he did. But
anyway, DeWorth could get along with nobody and
didn't even try to because he had tenure. But they
finally retired him. All right, so you served for
how many years as department head? No, I didn't
serve department head. I've served... I mean, as
the head of that part of the...
From 70 till... 70 to 71. Wait a minute. 70 to 71.
Seven years. Seven years. We rebuilt that thing
completely. And all we did in the world was open the
door, tell the students you're welcome. I said,
don't ever see me with the door locked. I wouldn't
let them lock the door. She would knock on the door
to get in. I said, never again. And my thinking, and
I told them, I said, when you don't have any
students to teach, you don't have a job here. And
just get that through your head right now. And
we've got work to do. I felt like you had to be firm,
fair, and consistent all the way through this. And
that's what I tried to do all the time. But I was so
delighted that at the end of seven years, we had a
viable department. And then they said, well, we
have to have a PhD to hit it. And that's when they got
Mr. Grolick. Now, who were the key people that
supported that growth, that helped you with it
outside the department? You mentioned... Oh,
Bloodworth. Okay. And Dick Potts. Dick Potts was
our friend. He was the associate, as associate
dean. Associate dean. Wonderful person. Just, I
don't think I could have ever done harder culture
without his help. I'd go down and he'd support me
on, see, I had to have, I had all the advising and
counseling for every member of the department.
Nobody ever told those kids what to take or when to
take them or anything else. There was some kids
that stayed in school a year or two long They lost a
lot of money that way, kids. But I'd make up a course
of study, and I'd tell them how to do it and when to do
it. And they had to do this. The students can't read
the catalog and know how to do this. If you don't
give them some help, they're lost. So I would guide
them as best I could. I had all of them myself.
Nobody else did it. But Dick Potts would help me.
When I got in a real bind with a kid to get him out of
school, I'd do this. I'll give you an example of one
student. It wasn't an A&M, it was a Texas Tech choir
taught three years. We had a young man who was 90%
disabled from mental, shell-shocked, and nobody
worked with him. So I thought, well, I'm going to
take him on and make a human out of him. So I knew it
was just like a timber box. The least thing could
set him off. So he needed help. three or four green
points to graduate. And he had taken a course over.
So finally I said, now Earl, I want you to take a
course over and I'll watch it for you. But before I
could tell him what to take, he enrolled in
chemistry. And he failed chemistry again. Now we
were back to square one. Well, he was really upset
because he failed chemistry. And I said, now Earl,
You stay with me, and I'm going to guide you
through. We're going to get you out of this
university. And I knew I could get him out of the
university if I handled him right. But you can't
just desert a guy like that and never get anywhere
with him. So I worked with him real fine, and I had
him almost over the barrier. And Hilo Urbanski,
the head of the org, came in, and he wanted a piece of
paper. And he opened a drawer, and there was Earl's
30th and 40th piece of cardboard he was working on.
And he said, oh, you're just, hell, I'll just take
that paper. You're wasting your time anyway with
that man. And at that minute, he walked in and heard
all this. He was drunk for three days. I finally got
him in the corner. I said, Earl, don't you ever go
around urbanizing again. I'm going to work you or
get you out of university here. We got him out. It
was 03 or 04 grade points to spare. And you know that
he went off to somewhere else and got a Ph.D. in
guidance and counseling?
And that's what brought up, I can think, what would
have happened to that kid if I left him alone? Now,
the dean at this time was Harry Kunkel. No, this was
at Texas Tech. Oh, I'm sorry. I'm sorry. All right.
Kunkel was the dean when you were building this
department. And he was supportive of the growth
and development. No, he said, what are you going to
do with all these girls? He said, they can't all be
biochemists. And I said, no, they don't want to be
biochemists. There's a whole other world out
there, Dean, besides biochemistry. And we're
going to explore it for you. I said, don't you
realize that the better we look and harder it goes,
the better it makes you look better? And he said,
no, no. He didn't accept that. Yeah, I had some
rough things to overcome with them because they
had that old Aggie autocratic
way. And he says, they can't all take a pile. And I
said, they don't want to do it. All right, and you
mentioned Perry Edkisson. He, at that point, was
department? No, he was assistant dean. Oh, he was
assistant dean. Describe him. He was on the math,
he was on the, Perry Edkisson was at a high rank on
campus. He was head of entomology, I know, and I
brought a student there one time that discovered
in his research, he discovered a new
strain of something that had never been done
before, original research. And he said, just send
me all the kids like that you can send me. And from
that day on, we were great friends. And we ended up
both on the campus planting. And that's where we
got the money for the horticulture building.
He, Perry Atkinson, is a scholar from way back.
Back to Mr. Rutter a second. As you worked with him
and Mr. Cherry and the others, were you aware of any
decline in Mr. Rutter's health? That was right in
my life. You know, all of a sudden somebody said,
Mr. Rutter is sick. Next thing I knew, he was dead.
And... LBJ came down, a whole few came down, and I
just took over arranging the flowers. You never
saw so many flowers in your barn in days. And they
called me from Florida and said, we got one from the
Secretary of State. We got one from this place in
Milwaukee. Get us a police farm. And I saved them a
police farm. We stacked them in there that way and
did the best we could. And LBJ came down, and boy, I
tell you, That was one more big day. I never had any
inkling that he was ill. And he died one month
before his 60th birthday. I knew that all of a
sudden the campus got quiet. And it was rumored
that he had a heart attack. And so it was. The
doctor, I'd say the doctor came, and I believe they
took him away from there, took him away from there
in an ambulance. The next thing we knew, he'd be
gone. All right. When Dr. Williams came, what was
your first interaction with him? Great.
Absolutely wonderful. Never had a world
presence. I said, details. He was huge. I did
things for him before he ever knew me, before his
wife ever got there. It was just part of the job to
get these things done. And he appreciated it a
great deal. But for a man to come to me and say, I've
not met you, I'm Jack Williams, and this man is a
short statue. We need to lower that. And a minute
later, kind of detailed, I never did anything like
that. He didn't write me anything. He didn't write
me a note. Just note after note after note all the
time, thanking me for things that were just a
routine part of the job I was supposed to do. And
after his heart trouble, he never was the same,
though. I just, I think, I thought I lost one of the
finest friends I'd ever had. I just thought the
world of him. He'd say, can you get so-and-so to
play golf with us this afternoon? Well, that
worked out fine, except every now and then
somebody said, I want you to get me and Jake to play
golf with the president. I said, I can't do that. If
he don't want you to play with him, you're not going
to do it. He said, he'll ask me if you want to do it.
And Armin Simpson played with him. But
when he, from the time his heart attack on, he was a
completely different man. And I know you would be,
anybody would be. But I just thought the world and
all of him. And I'm glad we got a building name for
him. Describe, you worked with Mrs. Williams.
Describe her and her personality.
Very different than the thing I was used to. She
wanted to rearrange the way I put the plants around
the stage at commencement and things like this.
And she was quite satisfied with the plants and the
way we had them arranged and the flowers. They were
quite satisfied with it. She wanted so she could do
them better, which is all right. I didn't question
her. She loved to do her thing. We never crossed the
line. That's the way it goes. All right. In As we got
near the 100th anniversary, 1976, there were
plans to add to the landscaping on the campus. Did
that fall within your? Yeah, but it fell through. I
didn't buy it. I had some friends in California
that raised roses, red roses. And I wanted to get a
maroon and white rose, Aggie rose. And that's the
right flat of his face. What happened? I just
proposed it, and nothing ever came of it. It just
died. Oh, the campus didn't support it? Nobody
supported it. Oh, really? Oh. I gave this to the
board at a board meeting. We were talking about
Campus 76 as a theme. And I couldn't get anybody.
There'll be six campus celebrations. Now, didn't
we plant the trees all the way around the old horse
pasture and the golf course? Wasn't that?
Perimeter trees was out. But that was not part of
that. That was planned expansion on my part. Oh,
that was not part of the centennial? No. I just felt
like we needed perimeter trees to mark the campus.
And whereas they were planted on main campus 20 and
30 feet apart where they couldn't grow, except we
didn't mention top. And that's what's caused a lot
of problems up there. We put them 80 feet from the
street and 80 feet apart. I wanted them back far
enough to make a statement in design, and then we
wouldn't have to cut them down if we widened
anything. And then they widened, take the avenue,
and luckily we didn't ruin the trees.
If, in addition to the maroon and white rows, Were
there any other dreams you had for the centennial
that you wish we could have done? Well, we didn't
get the first base of any plans on that. I don't know
whether the rose scared them off or what. These are
very good friends of mine and the number one
growers, Tops and Roses in California. And they
grew the Mr. Lincoln. and Oklahoma that we
introduced at the New York's World Fair, both of
them. Illinois built the only brick building on
that campus and called it the Land of Lincoln, and
they had the figure of him. They helped get his
birthday read. And so I went over to the lady, and I
said, now I have some friends who are hybridizing
the rules whose birthday is the next 12th, which is
Lincoln's birthday. and I can get you all the roses
you want to play on this place if you'd like to have
them." She said, we'd love to have them. Well, she
and me won for the long fight. She bought bud faces,
and she'd go out every morning and cut three roses.
And in two weeks, two years, she delivered a bud
face of Mr. Lincoln to every director of that camp
of a fair. And then we introduced the rose Mr., I
mean, Oklahoma there. When the last day of the
fair, people were pulling those things up, roots
and all, even grabbing a piece of grass to take with
them. But it was quite an experience. I was asked if
I could do the... Well, first a young man called me
one day and said, we would like to get your help on
the fair. Well, I thought they meant the state fair
in Oklahoma City. And he said... I said, yeah, I can
help you. I said, look, are you talking about the
New York World Fair? I said, I can't speak for that
much time, but if Dr. Cross wants me to help you, he
says we'll help you. And so Dr. Cross called me
about an hour. He said, I wish everybody on the
staff knew that I was president. But those people
were so great. And you know, he played football for
South Dakota. And he had a scholarship to wash the
dishes. He said, well, if I figured if I could wash
dishes in the girls' dormitory, I'd see every girl
in that school. And sure enough, the prettiest
girl in the whole school came through, and I got
her.
were beginning to, as the enrollment began to
expand under Mr. Rutter and Dr. Williams, the
campus had to expand. Did you have a chance to be a
part of the planning? I was supposed to until Paul
Stevens, everything we proposed, Paul Stevens
overruled it. And I wish I could remember the name
of the man that had so much trouble with him beside
me.
I was supposed to be in on everything, but
Stevenson never approved anything that I thought
of. Looking back, if
we could undo what we did and do it correctly, what
should we have done in planning the master plan at
A&M for the growth? What are some mistakes that...
Well, we should have had a master plan, not just a
piecemeal. Everything was done building by
building, and it came on the line, and you tried to
fit them in or not. Now, I knew that the main axis was
east-west. Wait a minute, is that right? Mm-hmm.
Yeah. And we had to terminate that axis somewhere.
It went through the middle of the administration
academic building. And so I terminated it before
we got out to that creek or river. Well, the
drainage ditch is back there. And so we
terminated, put the horticulture building as a
terminus of that axis. And then beyond that, we
could go other directions. But we had to terminate
that. axis before it fell off into that creek
leading to the river. And after we got the main axis
established, then we could have done cross axes on
it. That kind of planning was the kind that was
being done back then. Now the planning is entirely
different. But you need quadrangles and those
kind of things. What
kind of plant life should we have encouraged on the
campus?
You mean other than trees? Well, and trees, both.
Of course, I told you the story of the palms and the
oaks. I still think the lab oaks were all right for
the tree of choice. But I think we should have had a
few more in there, different species, if nothing
else, just to study.
But there
are a lot of real good broadleaf evergreens that we
use and are still using. This thing right here, you
saw that tree at lunch? Is that that one? That's the
name of it. And it started blooming in November.
Loro Petalum. L-O-R-O-P-E-T-A-L-U-M. Loro
Petalum. Petalum. Chinese fringe flower. Now,
that thing has been blooming since November here.
And it'll grow in Colorado State as well. All
right, should we have tried to grow roses? No. What
kinds of bushes should A&M? Well, there are a lot of
shrubs that we can grow. One of the best is Pitta's
Forum, and it's very good in evergreen, all green.
That's one of the best ones we have.
The school colors are easy to come by. At the
University of Oklahoma, I'd plant red tulips in
front of the boys' dormitories and white tulips in
front of the girls' dormitories. Just, you know, a
little bit of fun. And we're not in a four-season
climate. We're in a four-season climate, we've
got a lot of things for. But you've got to, for
instance, nothing is majestic to me as a
tall-bearded Irish, but you've got to be in the
four-seasons area to get enough coal to make those
things majestic. I used to grow up in Oklahoma all
the time, And as a collection. And there was Irish
shoes with them. But how did you come out with your
raised beds? So far, so good. You know, if you have
raised beds, you can control the water. But if you
don't have control of your beds, they can let me
drown out. And this is one of the first things I
learned about Fred and his home at A&M. They had
just that little place that you could grow those
flowers. And we grew them for it. Any
particular varieties of grass that A&M should
have attempted?
Well, before we had irrigation, they would
tolerate anything with Bermuda. And in the shade
places, you couldn't grow anything. So I think a
combination of Bermuda grass and St. Augustine
will work with irrigation. But, you know, if you
don't have water, it's bad. All right. Under Dr.
Williams, did you work with John Calhoun and
people like that? Yes. I remember John Calhoun
came from Oklahoma down there. He preceded me at
A&M. And I remember As soon as I got there, we talked
to each other. I remember very well. He was...
Engineering. Oh yeah, he was engineering. I
didn't have quite as close touch with him as I did
with some of the other ag cool things. In the
department, who are the people that deserve the
greatest credit for the growth and development of
what became the Department of Horticulture and
Floriculture? Who are the key people that deserve
the credit?
Perry Atkinson was as good a key as you can get. I was
the only one that knew the history of the
department. and reworked it into a, we had to have a
history of the department. You see, Dr. Pike was
there, and he wanted Dr., or Garlic Man, and we had a
lot of people apply for head of that department,
real top notch people. But we only had one
candidate, and that was the, I can't remember his
name now, but he was supported and pushed by Dr.
Pike, and he just developed that way. We got this
man, and they had been in an acting department for
19 years, and the three of us, Homer Blackhurst,
and I can't remember the other name, three of us
were professors, And he asked us to be his sounding
board. And so every time he'd ask us anything, we'd
tell him, and he'd do the exact opposite. And every
time, he got his tits from a ringer. His tail would
crack or something else. And finally, he couldn't
even get an appointment with the dean. Nobody
would talk to him. And he finally just evaporated.
As the department was growing, did you all have a
program at some other institution you were using
as a model? No. I was just using what I knew in common
sense. Now, let me tell you what I...
I had a thought there. I forgot. Oh,
I had asked those... And I told you, there were nine
academicians there. And it wasn't an academic
problem. It was a management problem. And the best
thing I had to do working for me was I asked them to
give me a first, second, third choice.